---
layout: post
title:  Recommendations for NBR, Bangladesh
---

The major reform of tax administration occurred in the 1990s, in
a democratic regime following military rule in the country. However, there is no study to measure the
effect of democratic environment on the revenue administration and governance. Indirect taxes are still the primary source of government income and contribute the lion’s
share of total tax receipts in Bangladesh. The administration of direct taxes is outdated and based on territorial and geographical administrative
units. As long as withholding taxes at sources has no central database, there is no way for the tax
administration to follow up on additional tax payments and also administer the withholding agencies.
The combined effect of all these deficiencies is the very low tax efficiency and the very low direct tax to
GDP ratio in Bangladesh. Given the context the main recommendations are:

- Broadening of the taxpayers’ base and identification of sectors. This will require the monitoring
of the ownership of all sizable physical and financial assets of taxpayers to determine the
income generated by those assets.

- Broadening of the tax revenue sources from the traditional dependence on taxing financial
institutions and a few large non-financial corporations. The tax administration has the tendency
to increase the tax burden on existing and compliant taxpayers and to not work hard on
identifying new taxpayers by gathering information from multiple sources.

- Focussing on income from service providers and self-employed (who are difficult to tax).

- Treating all sources of income equally for tax purposes without discrimination of households.
This would imply taxation of capital gains from land, real estate and housing, and the
stockmarket. Wealth accumulation in Bangladesh primarily happens through the accumulation
of urban land and real estate, untaxed or low tax income of the rapidly growing RMG (Ready Made Garments) sector, and relatively low tax incidence on income through financial
instruments.

- The simplistic manner of imposing Wealth Tax in the form of an Income Tax surcharge of 10%
should be abandoned. The NBR should move to develop a proper “Wealth Tax” or “Property
Tax” and reform measures are needed to determine the true value of property and apply
property tax to it. The current practice essentially increases the marginal tax rate by an
additional 10% and amounts to distorting the incentive to work or to increasing tax avoidance.
NBR has to build its capacity for the proper administration of the property and wealth tax, with
proper study and identification of the right way to collect the tax, not simply by adding to
income tax in the form of a surcharge.

- VAT in Bangladesh could be made less regressive by making a distinction between luxury goods
and basic-needs goods. Supplementary taxes can be imposed on luxury goods.

- VAT exemptions in Bangladesh should be limited to basic health services, public transport,
agriculture and agro-based industries and government education.

